.TH AGNSH 1 "April 2026" "agnoshi 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
agnsh \- AI-native natural language shell for AGNOS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B agnsh
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ -c
.IR COMMAND ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B agnsh
translates natural language into system commands with human oversight,
security approval workflows, and full audit logging.
.PP
Without arguments, starts an interactive shell. Type natural language to
see the proposed shell command and its permission level before execution.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -c, --command \fICMD\fR
Execute one command and exit.
.TP
.B -v, --version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show usage and exit.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B human
Direct shell execution, no AI assistance.
.TP
.B assist
AI parses intent, shows proposed command, requires approval for risky ops.
.TP
.B auto
AI executes safe commands autonomously; escalated ops fall back to assist.
.TP
.B strict
Every command requires explicit human approval.
.SH BUILTINS
.TP
.B help
Show built-in commands.
.TP
.B clear
Clear screen.
.TP
.B exit, quit
Exit shell.
.TP
.B history
Show command history.
.TP
.B mode [NAME]
Show or change operating mode (human, assist, auto, strict).
.TP
.B undo
Undo last destructive operation (via checkpoint).
.SH PERMISSIONS
Every command is classified into one of six levels:
.TP
.B SAFE
No state change (cd, echo, help).
.TP
.B READ_ONLY
System queries (ls, cat, ps).
.TP
.B USER_WRITE
Modifies user files (cp, mv, touch).
.TP
.B SYSTEM_WRITE
Modifies system paths (requires approval).
.TP
.B ADMIN
Requires sudo (requires approval).
.TP
.B BLOCKED
Never allowed for AI (rm -rf, dd, mkfs, chmod, chown).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.agnsh_history
Command history (mode 0600).
.TP
.I ~/.agnsh_audit.log
Structured JSON audit log.
.TP
.I ~/.agnoshi/checkpoints/
Backup files for undo (mode 0700).
.SH AUTHOR
Written for the AGNOS project.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR sudo (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
